Add remote authenticator docs (#5384)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/reference/remote-authenticator.md

---
layout: default
title: Remote Authenticator
description: This section covers lakeFS's remote authenticator architecture for integrating with existing security infrastructure
parent: Reference
nav_order: 62
has_children: false
---

# Remote Authenticator

Remote Authenticator is a pluggable architecture for lakeFS which allows you to integrate any existing organizational identity policies and infrastructure into the  authentication mechanism of lakeFS. This flexibility will enable you to fulfill any security requirement without allowing lakeFS direct access to your identity infrastructure.

## Architecture

The lakeFS authentication flow is detailed the diagram below.

```mermaid

> sequenceDiagram

Author: Unfortunately, it seems like it's not possible currently ([ref](https://github.com/mermaid-js/mermaid/issues/523))

    participant A as lakeFS Client
    participant B as lakeFS Server
    participant C as Remote Authenticator

>     participant D as IdP

Author: `IdP` is short for "Identity Provider." It's a term taken from the OAuth2 spec and has a distinct meaning written this way. Spelling it out would lose some meaning which is relevant to the context. (i.e., it's its own thing :)). 
Hope that makes sense.

    A->>B: Submit login form
    B->>C: POST user credentials
    C->>D: IdP request
    D->>C: IdP response
    C->>B: Auth response
    B->>A: auth JWT
```

> The Remote Authenticator's job is to abstract away the complexities of existing infrastructure and implement a standard interface, which lakeFS can use to resolve user identity and manage access to lakeFS. This loose coupling allows you to implement Remote Authenticator to work with any existing identity backend without providing lakeFS with direct access to your identity infrastructure.

Author: Fixed

## The Interface

> To allow lakeFS to work with a Remote Authenticator, you'll first need to add the following YAML to your lakeFS configuration

Author: Done

```yaml
auth:
    remote_authenticator:
        enabled: true
        endpoint: <url-to-remote-authenticator-endpoint>
        default_user_group: "Developers"
    ui_config:
        logout_url: /logout
        login_cookie_names:
            - internal_auth_session
```

- `auth.remote_authenticator.enabled` - set lakeFS to use the remote authenticator
- `auth.remote_authenticator.endpoint` - an endpoint where the remote authenticator is able to receive a POST request from lakeFS
- `auth.remote_authenticator.default_user_group` - the group assigned by default to new users
- `auth.ui_config.logout_url` - the URL to redirect the browser when clicking the logout link in the user menu
- `auth.ui_config.login_cookie_names` - the name of the cookie(s) lakeFS will set following a successful authentication. The value is the authenticated user's JWT

> A Remote Authenticator implementation should expose a single endpoint, which receives the following JSON request:

Author: Done

```JSON
{

>     "username": "testy.mctestface@testing.com",

Author: Done.

    "password": "Password1"
}
```

> and return a JSON response like this:

Author: Fixed

```JSON
{
    "external_user_identifier": "TestyMcTestface"
}

> ```

Reviewer: ah ok, I read on, now i see

> If the Remote Authenticator returns a non-empty value for the `external_user_identifier` property along with a success HTTP status, lakeFS will show this identifier instead of an internal lakeFS user identifier in the UI.

> If the Remote Authenticator returns any HTTP status in the 2xx range, lakeFS considers this a successful authentication. Any HTTP status < 200 or > 300 is considered a failed authentication. If the Remote Authenticator returns a non-empty value for the `external_user_identifier` property along with a success HTTP status, lakeFS will show this identifier instead of an internal lakeFS user identifier in the UI.

Reviewer: I would recommend restructuring this to be more clear around the response details, which break down into two: 

1. The HTTP response 
2. The optional `external_user_identifier` value

At the moment it's a bit back & forth. Perhaps put the example JSON after the recommendation, and also show it as an HTTP response with the code too. You could show example responses of a successful and unsuccessful auth.

Author: Added example req and un/successful resp examples

## Sample Implementation

> To assist with implementing a Remote Authenticator, below you can find a sample Remote Authenticator implemented using [node](https://nodejs.org/) and [express](https://expressjs.com/) and written in TypeScript. This example implementation doesn't integrate with any real IdP but can serve as a starting point for reference. A fully functional implementation can be done with any programming language and platform of your choice and can integrate with any existing IdP infrastructure you are currently running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a sample Remote Authenticator implemented using [node](https://nodejs.org/) and [express](https://expressjs.com/) and written in TypeScript. It doesn't integrate with any real IdP but illustrates the expected request/response patterns that you need to implement 
```

I would remove this bits

> A fully functional implementation can be done with any programming language and platform of your choice and can integrate with any existing IdP infrastructure you are currently running.

it's kinda stating the obvious. sometimes less is more :)

Author: Done
